Welcome back.
Before we're able to talk about functional programming an object oriented programming and close this
entire section out.
We have to talk about composition versus inheritance.
First what are those two things.
And by now we should understand their meaning.
Right.
Inheritance is.
Well it's a superclass like a character over here.
And remember we've seen this code before with our Elf and yoga classes.
Inheritance is a superclass that is extended to smaller pieces that add or overwrite things like here
we had elf an ogre that extended the functionality of character.
We used inheritance using class extends composition is smaller pieces to create something bigger.
We've seen that before with compose right.
We composed functions to give a function like purchase item.
Different abilities compose to functions to act upon data differently.
Smaller pieces that are combined to create something bigger the debate between composition versus inheritance
is a pretty heavy one and a lot of people prefer composition over inheritance.
So I wanted to talk to you about some of the problems that might come with inheritance and how composition
might solve some of those problems.
Now what I'm about to talk about doesn't specifically mean that hey object oriented programming is only
inheritance and functional programming is only composition.
No you can do both things in both paradigms.
However one tends to focus more on composition like functional programming and one over inheritance.
So in the next discussion that we're gonna have here I am generalizing and simplifying things to demonstrate
what I mean.
The goal is to understand some of the drawbacks that might come when using composition or inheritance.
So let's get started.
The first thing that we want to keep in mind when we talk about inheritance are structure and the structure
of our code is around what it is.
That is what is the character class what is the elf class we're structuring our classes around what
things are they have data as well as methods and actions and functions that act upon that data with
composition.
On the other hand we focus and structure our code around what it has or what it does to data.
So we're focusing on what the abilities are and what it is.
Now I know that's not super clear but let's go over this.
When we define something as what it is.
We're saying hey character is going to have these properties methods.
Elf is going to have these properties and methods and ogre is going to have these properties and methods
but what if things change when we define things as what they are.
We are saying that this is what's going to happen but as humans we're notoriously bad at predicting
the future.
Right.
And we're assuming no change.
So let's play out the scenario let's say that we now find out that we need to update our game and the
character well the character needs to have a sleep method added to it.
I mean that's fine right.
Not a big deal.
Now all my classes will that extend from character which will have this sleep method which is good.
But there lies a problem called the tight coupling problem.
You see the coupling between a child class and its parent is a very tight form of coupling.
And what does that mean.
Well it's the opposite of reusable modular code because making a small change to a class or even if
we change something in the attack method will have these rippling effects to all its subclasses so maybe
we made a small change like adding sleep or we made a small change where the attack method does something
different down the road maybe the ogre class did something different to attack than now breaks things.
Because some developer changed the parent class and this idea of a tightly coupled inheritance where
you can change things in one place and will have rippling effects into the other can be a benefit where
you don't you keep your code dry but can also cause a lot of problems so you have all these dependencies
where if you change something on a class well you have to make sure that it doesn't break anything with
its subclasses.
And remember these subclasses are using inheritance and this leads to the other problem.
And let me write it down just so you get reminded.
We have the tight coupling problem which leads to the fragile base class problem.
With inheritance where because the base class in this case the character class changes all subclasses.
This can be very fragile because of tight coupling.
It can break our code down the path another problem that we might encounter with inheritance is the
hierarchy problem.
We only have a simple setup here with character and Elf an ogre.
But what if we had two different kinds of else.
We had a boss Elf and a junior Elf and the boss elf or the junior elf inherits from the boss.
Elf.
The problem with this with this hierarchy is that well what if it changes.
What if the junior elf for some reason in the game is higher up than the hierarchy then the boss elf
and I hope you're starting to see a trend with this problem of the idea of what it is.
Because with inheritance we can start getting into a situation where we design the game with let's say
a user in mind then a character in mind that is a subclass and then we have the elf and the ogre but
then all of a sudden the game changes or we need to make an update.
So we also add a watcher class and so on and so forth.
And the problem starts to arise now where we want to start sharing methods but let's say that I have
the junior elf over here Junior elf class and the junior elf can't really do anything maybe just sleep
so we create the junior elf.
But the problem is now that because Junior Elf is inheriting from all these super classes it's going
to inherit all the methods that well it doesn't really need and this is the classic gorilla banana problem
when it comes to inheritance where it says Hey I just want a banana.
Give me a banana but instead you get a gorilla holding a banana and the entire jungle underneath it.
In this case the jungle being the user maybe the gorilla being the character and all you wanted was
the sleep method and then on top of that you are assuming that this is what it is.
That is user is going to have these methods watcher and character is going to have the same thing and
this structure or what we might call taxonomy is that we're predicting that this is how it's going to
be even in the future but as soon as we start updating the game or changing small things or adding new
classes with subtle difference maybe changing what inherits from one the fact that all of this is so
tightly coupled and that we inherit everything from our class and we have to make sure that we structure
our programs in a way where inheritance makes sense.
And as soon as something changes where maybe the watcher has to move up a class.
Well everything just becomes too tightly couple where eventually as a program gets bigger and bigger
it creates more and more issues.
And then you start to refactor the code and all of a sudden you start violating the dry principle of
do not repeat yourself if we know that some of this inheritance principles are bad.
How can we fix it with composition.
Well the first thing we can do is to remove all the methods what I mean by that.
Let's demonstrate with an example let's create a function that creates an elf.
And this elf will have name weapon and type and in here we'll just have the elf that we create.
And this elf will have the name and we can just go like this with the new E6 syntax.
And there you go.
We have an elf just like we had here in our constructor but without necessarily worrying about the character
and the elf and the inheritance model but let's say that the elf can also attack assuming that in this
class we had the attack method or we don't need to because while it inherited with composition how can
we do that.
If we're not going to do inheritance Well the idea with composition is it's all about what it has the
abilities that it has so the code is structure as to what it does to the data instead of what the elf
is.
So the elf can attack.
In that case why not just create a function called attack that takes in the user or in this case the
let's say character and in here we can just return object dot assign which we've seen before and just
return a new object.
With the attack function attached to it so maybe we can name this to get attack ability which allows
our character to be added or have the elf character
add the attack function which can be anything.
I'll just leave it blank for now.
So now we can just call get attack and we'll return from this function in this get attack will receive
the elf and this get attack will add the attack function that will add in here to the elf we're composing
instead of just inheriting we're saying hey these are the abilities that the elf has.
Here's the barest elf character possible.
And if we want we can keep adding abilities to the elf so using this method I can say that I can keep
adding things.
I can say that the elf can attack.
Can also let's say sleep.
What about an ogre.
Well an ogre can attack it can make forts but it can also definitely sleep.
Now this is pseudocode obviously but I hope you understand what I'm trying to get it.
We've turned this inheritance model from what the elf is which we had here.
This is what the elf is to what the elf does.
We have the base elf but we give the elf abilities through things like get attack which just uses functions
to add to the character object different abilities so that we can compose these small little pieces
of functionality to describe our character and the beauty here is that state is not really created internally
get attacked simply accepts a state and returns it.
Same with Elf.
We have a function that internally creates elf but then spits out a new ELF object with the functionality
that we need to review inheritance is a superclass that is extended to smaller pieces that add or overwrite
things.
That's inheritance and although you can be careful with it and making sure that the base class is very
very general so that we don't overload our subclasses it can easily get out of hand as we go deeper
and deeper down the inheritance chain.
And once we need to change something it becomes really difficult.
On the other hand with composition it's about smaller pieces that are combined to create something bigger
we combined the boxes based on what we need to create our desired output.
And if we need to add something later on while we just add another puzzle by composing things together
or we add another box and composing things or you can remove them.
If we don't need them anymore I argue and a lot of programmers argue that composition is a better solution
long term than inheritance.
This doesn't mean that inheritance is always bad.
There are ways that you can still write great code with inheritance but the problems that might come
up in the future especially with so many unknowns and humans unable to predict the future and all the
changes that we might need to make to a program it becomes really difficult.
So composition is a good tool for you to use to keep in mind when creating software because this is
going to help us create code that is more stable as well as easier to change in the future.
I'll see in the next one Bye.